SECTION VI

THE RELATIVE STRENGTH INDEX

The RELATIVE STRENGTH INDEX, RS|, isa
tool which can add a new dimension to chart in-
terpretation when plotted in conjunction with a
daily bar chart. Some of these interpretative fac-
tors are:

TOPS and BOTTOMS are indicated when
the RSI goes above 70 or drops below 30.

CHART FORMATIONS which often show up
graphically on the RSl may not be apparent
on the bar chart.

FAILURE SWINGS above 70 or below 30 on
the RSI scale are strong indications of
market reversals.

SUPPORT and RESISTANCE often show up
clearly on the RSI| before becoming ap-
parent on the bar chart.

DIVERGENCE between the RSI and price
action on the chart is a very strong indica-
tion that a market turning point is imminent.

Before taking up the equation for calcu-
lating the Relative Strength Index, let's examine
briefly the momentum concept upon which the
RSI is based.

The Momentum Osclllator Concept

One of the most useful tools employed by
many technicians is the momentum oscillator.
The momentum oscillator measures the velocity
of directional price movement. When the price
moves up very rapidly, at some point it is con-
sidered to be overbought; when it moves down
very rapidly, at some point it is considered to be
oversold. In either case, a reaction or reversal is
imminent. The slope of the momentum oscillator
is directly proportional to the velocity of the
move. The distance traveled up or down by the
momentum oscillator is proportional to the
magnitude of the move.

63

The momentum oscillator is usually charac-
terized by a line on a chart drawn in two dimen-
sions. The ‘Y’ axis (vertical) represents
magnitude or distance the indicator moves; the
‘X’ axis (horizontal) represents time. The momen-
tum oscillator drawn in this manner is charac-
terized by the fact that it moves very rapidly at
market turning points and tends to slow down as
the market continues the directional move.

Suppose we are using the close price to
calculate the oscillator and the price is moving
up daily by exactly the same increment from
close to close. At some point, the oscillator
begins to flatten out and eventually becomes a
horizontal line. When this occurs, if the price
begins to level out, the oscillator will begin to
descend.

Let’s look at this concept using a simple os-
cillator expressed in terms of the price today
minus the price ‘X’ number of days ago. In this
example, we will use the price today minus the
price ten days ago. The oscillator is measured
from a zero line. If the price ten days ago were
higher than the price today, then the oscillator
value is minus; conversely, if today’s price were
higher than the price ten days ago, then the os-
cillator value is plus.

The easiest way to illustrate the interaction
between price movement and oscillator move-
ment is to take a straight line-price relationship
and plot the oscillator points based on this
relationship.

In Fig. 6.1, we begin on Day 10 when the
close price is 48.50. The price ten days ago, on
Day 1, is 50.75. Utilizing a ten day oscillator, we
take today’s price of 48.50, subtract the price ten
days ago, 50.75, and the result, —2.25, is the os-
cillator value. This oscillator value of —2.25 is
plotted below the zero line. By following this

% NEW CONCERTS N TECHRICAL TRADING SYSTEMS

_1—
-2- c o e o
51~ _
50~ -_"-
49~ --"'—
48 = " -
47 = S TR T T T |
a4 & s 10 12

OSCILLATOR CURVE

- PRICE CURVE

Fig. 6.1

procedure for
cillator curve.

each day, we develop the os-

The oscillator curve developed in this
hypothetical situation is very interesting. As the
price moves down by the same increment each
day between Days 10 and 14, the oscillator curve
is a horizontal line. On Day 15, the price turns up
by 25 points yet the oscillator turns up by 50
points. The oscillator is increasing twice as fast
as the price. The oscillator continues this rate of
movement until Day 23 when its value becomes a
constant although the price continues to move
up at the same rate.

On Day 29, another very interesting thing
happens. The price levels out at 51.00, yet the os-
cillator begins to go down, If the price continues
to move horizontally, the oscillator will continue
to descend until the tenth day at which time both
the oscillator and the .price will be moving
horizontally. '

Note the interaction of the oscillator curve
and the price curve. The oscillator appears to be
one step ahead of the price; the reason being
that the oscillator, in effect, is measuring the rate
of change of price movement. Between Days 14
and 23, the oscillator shows that the price rate of
change is very fast because the direction of the
price is changing from down to up. Once the
price of ten days ago has bottomed out and star-
ted up, then the rate of change slows down
because the increments of change are measured
in one direction only.

The oscillator can be an excellent technical
tool for the trader who understands its inherent
characteristics; however, there are three
problems encountered in developing a
meaningful oscillator.

The first problem is erratic movement within
the general oscillator configuration. As an exam-
ple of this, using a ten day oscillator, suppose

64

BREMRIRL FOAARIANFTFITCS ABE WITORAIRITEN B 0 TOFU A FnARAS CABHELTI B v -
that ten days ago the price moved limit down
from the previous day. Now, suppose that today,
the price closed the same as yesterday. When we
subtract the price ten days ago from the price to-
day, we will get an erroneously high value for the
oscillator today. To overcome this problem, there
must be some way to dampen or smooth out the
extreme points used to calculate the oscillator.

The second problem characteristic of os-
cillators is the scale to use for the ‘Y’ axis. In other
words, how high is high and how low is low? The
scale will also change with each commodity be-
ing charted. To overcome this problem, there
must be some common denominator to apply to
all commodities so the amplitude of the oscillator
is relative and meaningful.

The third problem is the necessity of having
to keep up with enormous amounts of data. This
is the least of the three problems; however, it can
become burdensome to the trader who is follow-
ing several commodities with an oscillator
technique.

The solution to these three problems is in-

corporated in the indicator which we will call THE
RELATIVE STRENGTH INDEX.

The Relative Strength
index Equation

The equation for the Relative Strength In-
dex, RS, is:

100_[ 100 ]
1 + RS

RS Average of 14 day’s closes UP

]

RSI

Average of 14 day’s closes DOWN

For the first calculation of the Relative
Strength Index, RSI, we need the previous 14
day’s close prices. From then on, we need only
the previous day’s data. The initial RSI is
calculated as follows:

(1) Obtain the sum of the UP closes for the
previous 14 days and divide this sum by 14.
This is the average UP close.

65

(2) Obtain the sum of the DOWN closes for
the previous 14 days and divide this sum by
14. This is the average DOWN close.

(3) Divide the average UP close by the
average DOWN close. This is the Relative
Strength (RS).

(4) Add 1.00 to the RS.

(5) Divide the result obtained in Step 4 into
100.

(6) Subtract the result obtained in Step 5
from 100. This is the first RSI.

From this point on, it is only necessary to
use the previous average UP close and the
previous average DOWN close in the calculation
of the next RSI. This procedure, which incor-
porates the dampening or smoothing factor into
the equation, is as follows:

(1) To obtain the next average UP close:
Multiply the previous average UP close by
13, add to this amount today’'s UP close (if
any) and divide the total by 14.

(2) To obtain the next average DOWN
close:

Multiply the previous average DOWN close
by 13, add to this amount today’'s DOWN
close (if any) and divide the total by 14.

Steps (3), (4), (5) and (6) are the same as for
the initial RSI.

An easy way to keep up with the RSI on a
daily basis is to use a ten column worksheet, Fig.
6.2.

Column #1 is the date.
Column #2 is the close price for the day.

Column #3 is the amount the price closed UP
from the previous day.
(For example, on Day 2, the price
closed UP 2.00 from Day 1. Entry is
made in Column #3 only if the price
closed UP from the previous day.)

Column #4 is the amount the price closed
DOWN from the previous day.
(For example, on Day 8, the price
closed DOWN 1.57 from the close on
Day 7. Entry is made in column #4

S NEW OOMOESTS M TEAMMIR AT T 8N IMM fverwsan ——

